---
layout: post
title:  "Best of 2019"
date:   2020-03-13 21:51:00 +0100
categories: [review, culture]
---

I used to post my list of best books, movies, TV shows and music on my Facebook every year. Since I'm not using the social network anymore, some of my friends asked me to post the list somewhere else so that they could check what I was up to. A little overdue, yet here it is!

Note: Even though I wrote notes after the lists, these are not supposed to be a review (they're too short and shallow), but rather just some commentary about the decision to include some particular entries.

### Movies 🎥

- Marriage Story
- Parasite
- Joker
- The Lighthouse

Marriage Story might be one of my favourite movies ever. Nice structure (what about that opening scene?), characters that feel real (aided by powerful acting derived from a good script), I really felt an emotional connection watching this movie and this is a prime example of good writing and storytelling. 

I watched Parasite by chance and was drawn to its aesthetics and social issues. The same applies to Joker. While the latter is a little more obvious in its social criticism, Parasite gives you nuance. Both are highly entertaining.

The Witch was my favourite movie of 2015, so when I heard Robert Eggers was directing another movie, I had to watch it. The Lighthouse is not as hauting and eerie as The Witch, however provides a nice atmosphere with isolation and madness as the main horror engine.

I've been watching Star Wars since I was a kid and love the saga, however I did not include Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker on this list. The main reason is that despite the movie was fun by itself, it showed that there was no planning behind the new trilogy and no arc for the characters (Kylo Ren aside), rendering the whole thing a bit pointless.

### TV Shows 📺

- Mad Men
- Sex Education
- Dix pour cent

TV shows (in general) are not my cup of tea, I prefer to spend 120 mins on a good movie than countless hours on TV shows. With movies, I feel like I'm watching a finished product, with (not always) a clear beggining and end. To me, TV shows sometimes seem to stretch far beyond their original purpose based on the public's feedback only (aka "milking the cow").

Of course, there are also TV shows with firm direction that care more about the craft of storytelling. Mad Men is a "textbook" example for me and I am pleased (dare I say shocked) with how well crafted the show is. The production design (costume and set pieces), story arc of the characters and soundtrack are incredible. 

The same applies to the British Sex Education, with much needed conversations about sexuality not only suitable for teenager audiences but adults as well. The characters feel real and realized with plots that you want to follow.

### Books 📚

- Digital Minimalism (Cal Newport)
- Men Without Women (Haruki Murakami)
- Barking up the wrong tree (Eric Barker)
- Eating Animals (Jonathan Safran Foer)

2019 was the year I became vegetarian and Eating Animals definitely helped in laying the foundations on how I think about not only meat but food in general. It made me realize that I don't eat animals anymore for environmental, polical and even health reasons.

It's been a while since I last read fiction romances (mostly because I'm going through a phase of personal development and tech books), and Murakami surprised me. This book is comprised of 7 short stories with the unifying theme of unusual relationships between women and men. I read the book in a rainy Sunday and it was impossible to put down. It is that good.

As I stated in the beggining of this post, I'm not using Facebook anymore and Cal Newport's Digital Minimalism helped me the same way Eating Animals solidified my beliefs. For me, it is a book about claiming your attention and focus back, being in control and more aware of your surroundings. I recommend this book to everyone, regardless of how deep their relationship with technology is.

### Music 🎵 

- Giant Steps (John Coltrane)
- Hva nå (No.4)
- In Cauda Venenum (Opeth)
- Lover (Taylor Swift)

I really like Duke Ellington, Chet Baker, Vince Guaraldi Trio, Dave Brubeck, Pat Matheny, etc, so it's puzzling why I haven't listened to Giant Steps before, but oh boy, I'm glad I did now. The title track alone is a tour de force that I cannot do justice to, so I'll leave you with the video [The most feared song in jazz, explained](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62tIvfP9A2w) by Vox.

Swedish and Norwegian are my favourite natural languages, so naturally I searched for Nordic/Scandinavian content in order to deepen my knowledge of the languages. No.4 is a Norwegian pop trio from Oslo that I fell in love with in 2016 after listening to their album Henda i været. The vocal harmonies are beautiful and coupled with the sound of the Norwegian language, it was hard for me not to like them. The title track and Alexander B form a strong opening.

My longest standing friendship is with Opeth's biggest fan. The band put out its latest progressive metal album In Cauda Venenum in English and Swedish, meaning I had no excuse not to listen to the album. I wanted to give an in-depth review to my friend, so I listened to the album several times. One of the key reasons why I love prog rock is that the genre is quite dynamic, with complex song structures and lots of variations of tone, tempo and mood. In Cauda Venenum is no exception as you have heavy alongside calm, eerie paired with agressive and so on. Minnets yta has a beautiful guitar solo and I admire the fact that Mikael Åkerfeldt both sings and plays rythmns and leads! Hjärtat Vet Vad Handen Gör showcases the dynamism and tempo/mood changes I wrote about so fondly.

Taylor Swift's Lover features cool hooks sing along songs (thinking of I Forgot That You Existed, Cruel Summer, You Need To Calm Down and ME!). My favourite tracks are Afterglow and It's Nice To Have A Friend, both having a vibe, a feel which I haven't found anywhere else so far. It's not common for contemporary pop artists to play instruments and write their own lyrics, and Taylor has written some great (very descriptive, almost cinematic) lyrics throughout her career.

---

There are so many others artists/writers/movies/etc that made my 2019 brighter that should be in this list, however I tried to cherry-pick the best I could.
